README.md, before:

# 🏥 Smart Health - Healthcare Provider Dashboard

A full-stack health risk assessment platform designed for **healthcare providers** (doctors, clinics, hospitals) to monitor and manage patient health risks using machine learning predictions. The system enables healthcare professionals to conduct patient assessments, track population health trends, and identify high-risk patients requiring immediate attention.

## 🎯 Use Case

**Target Users**: Healthcare providers, medical clinics, hospitals, occupational health departments

**Primary Purpose**: Population health management and patient risk stratification

**Key Scenarios**:
- 👨‍⚕️ **Medical Checkups**: Doctors assess patients during routine visits, instantly view risk scores
- 🏥 **Clinic Management**: Track overall patient population health, identify trends
- 🚨 **Risk Identification**: Automatically flag high-risk patients for follow-up care
- 📊 **Health Analytics**: View risk distribution across patient base, monitor population metrics
- 📋 **Patient Records**: Maintain historical health assessments for each patient

**Workflow**:
1. Healthcare provider logs into the dashboard
2. Conducts patient assessment using 4-step onboarding form (age, body metrics, lifestyle)
3. System calculates health risk score using ML model
4. Dashboard displays patient in risk-categorized table (Low/Medium/High)
5. Provider reviews population analytics and identifies patients needing intervention

## 🌐 Live Demo

**🚀 Full-Stack Application (Production)**

**Frontend (React App)**: [https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net](https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net)

**Backend API (HTTPS)**: [https://13.61.154.156/docs](https://13.61.154.156/docs)

**Demo Credentials:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`

**Deployment:**
- Frontend: AWS S3 + CloudFront CDN (Global distribution)
- Backend: AWS EC2 with Docker + Nginx SSL reverse proxy
- Database: SQLite (containerized)

**Note**: Backend uses self-signed SSL certificate. Your browser may show a security warning on first visit - click "Advanced" → "Proceed to site" to access the API documentation.

## 📊 Healthcare Provider Dashboard

The frontend is designed as a **comprehensive patient management dashboard** for healthcare professionals:

### Dashboard Overview
![Dashboard Screenshot - Coming Soon]

**Key Components**:

1. **Statistics Overview Panel**
   - 5 real-time metrics cards displaying:
     - Total number of patients assessed
     - High-risk patient count (Risk Score ≥ 0.7) - Red alert
     - Medium-risk patient count (0.4 ≤ Risk Score < 0.7) - Yellow warning
     - Low-risk patient count (Risk Score < 0.4) - Green safe
     - Average risk score across entire patient population

2. **Risk Distribution Visualization**
   - Interactive bar chart showing patient distribution across risk categories
   - Helps identify population health trends at a glance
   - Color-coded for quick interpretation (Green/Yellow/Red)

3. **Patient Assessment Table**
   - Comprehensive list of all patient assessments
   - Columns: Patient ID, Age, BMI, Risk Score, Risk Level (badge), Assessment Date
   - Color-coded risk badges for instant visual identification
   - Hover effects for better UX
   - Sortable and searchable (future enhancement)

4. **Patient Assessment Workflow**
   - 4-step form wizard for conducting patient evaluations
   - Auto-calculates BMI from height/weight
   - Maps activity levels to exercise hours (Sedentary=0, Moderate=3, Active=7 hrs/week)
   - Validates all inputs before submission
   - Shows loading states and error messages

### Risk Categorization Logic

| Risk Level | Score Range | Color Code | Action Required |
|------------|-------------|------------|-----------------|
| **Low Risk** | 0.0 - 0.39 | 🟢 Green | Routine monitoring |
| **Medium Risk** | 0.4 - 0.69 | 🟡 Yellow | Follow-up recommended |
| **High Risk** | 0.7 - 1.0 | 🔴 Red | Immediate intervention |

### Typical Use Flow

```
Healthcare Provider Login
    ↓
View Dashboard (Population Overview)
    ↓
Click "New Assessment" / Navigate to Onboarding
    ↓
Enter Patient Data (Steps 1-4)
    ↓
Review Summary & Submit
    ↓
Return to Dashboard (Updated Stats)
    ↓
Review Patient in Table with Risk Badge
    ↓
Identify High-Risk Patients
    ↓
Schedule Follow-up Care
```

## ✨ Features

**Backend:**
- **Health Risk Prediction API**: ML-powered risk assessment based on user health data
- **JWT Authentication**: Secure token-based authentication with auto-logout
- **RESTful API**: Built with FastAPI for high performance and automatic documentation
- **Database Management**: SQLModel + SQLite for data persistence
- **Machine Learning**: Scikit-learn based prediction model
- **Auto-generated API Docs**: Interactive Swagger UI and ReDoc
- **Docker Support**: Containerized deployment with Docker & Docker Compose
- **CORS Enabled**: Configured for cross-origin requests

**Frontend (Healthcare Provider Dashboard):**
- **Provider Authentication**: Secure JWT-based login for healthcare staff
- **Patient Assessment Form**: 4-step onboarding wizard for conducting patient evaluations
  - Step 1: Basic Information (Age, Gender)
  - Step 2: Body Metrics (Height, Weight → auto-calculates BMI)
  - Step 3: Lifestyle & Health (Activity level, Sleep, Smoker, Alcohol consumption)
  - Step 4: Summary Review & Submission
- **Population Health Dashboard**:
  - 📊 **Statistics Cards**: Total patients, High/Medium/Low risk counts, Average risk score
  - 📈 **Risk Distribution Chart**: Bar chart showing patient risk categorization
  - 📋 **Patient Assessment Table**: Sortable list with Patient ID, Age, BMI, Risk Score, Risk Level badges
- **Modern UI**: Tailwind CSS with purple/indigo gradient theme, smooth animations
- **Responsive Design**: Works seamlessly on desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Session Management**: Auto-logout on token expiration for security
- **Real-time Updates**: Dashboard refreshes after each patient assessment
- **Color-Coded Risk Levels**: Green (Low <0.4), Yellow (Medium 0.4-0.7), Red (High ≥0.7)

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

**Backend:**
- **Framework**: FastAPI 0.101.0
- **Authentication**: JWT (python-jose)
- **Password Hashing**: SHA256
- **Server**: Uvicorn 0.23.2
- **ORM**: SQLModel 0.0.14
- **Database**: SQLite (via SQLAlchemy 2.0.44)
- **ML**: Scikit-learn 1.3.2, Pandas 2.2.2, NumPy 1.26.4
- **Python Version**: 3.12.6
- **Container**: Docker & Docker Compose

**Frontend:**
- **Framework**: React 19.2.0 + TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 7.2.2
- **Routing**: React Router v6.30.1
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS v4.1.17
- **Forms**: React Hook Form 7.66.1
- **HTTP Client**: Axios 1.13.2
- **Charts**: Chart.js 4.5.1 + React ChartJS 2
- **State Management**: React Context API

## 📋 Prerequisites

**Option 1: Docker (Recommended - Easiest)**
- Docker Desktop installed
- No Python or Node.js installation needed!

**Option 2: Local Development**
- **Backend**: Python 3.12+, pip, Virtual environment (recommended)
- **Frontend**: Node.js 18+, npm

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Option 1: Using Docker (Recommended - Production Ready) 🐳

The easiest way to run the application is using our pre-built Docker image from Docker Hub:

```bash
# Pull the image from Docker Hub
docker pull bsk25/smart-health-backend:latest

# Run the container (detached mode)
docker run -d -p 8000:8000 --name smart-health-api bsk25/smart-health-backend:latest

# Access the API
# Backend: http://localhost:8000/docs

# Useful commands:
# docker ps                    # View running containers
# docker logs smart-health-api # View container logs
# docker stop smart-health-api # Stop the container
# docker rm smart-health-api   # Remove the container
```

**Or use Docker Compose for full-stack (backend + frontend):**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/bhakti259/smart-health-backend.git
cd smart-health-backend

# Start both backend and frontend
docker-compose up -d

# Access the application
# Frontend: http://localhost
# Backend API: http://localhost:8000/docs
```

For detailed Docker instructions, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

---

### Option 2: Local Development Setup

#### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bhakti259/smart-health-backend.git
cd smart-health-backend
```

#### 2. Set Up Virtual Environment

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv

# Activate virtual environment
# On Windows (PowerShell)
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# On Windows (CMD)
.venv\Scripts\activate.bat

# On Linux/Mac
source .venv/bin/activate
```

### 3. Install Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 4. Train the ML Model (First Time Setup)

```bash
python backend/app/backend_ml/train.py
```

This creates the ML model file (`health_risk_model.pkl`) needed for predictions.

### 5. Run the Server

**Backend:**
```bash
# Using Python module
python -m uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000

# Or if virtual environment is activated
uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000
```

The API will be available at:

- **API**: <http://localhost:8000>
- **Swagger UI**: <http://localhost:8000/docs>
- **ReDoc**: <http://localhost:8000/redoc>

**Frontend:**
```bash
# Navigate to frontend directory
cd frontend

# Install dependencies (first time only)
npm install

# Start development server
npm run dev
```

The frontend will be available at:
- **Application**: <http://localhost:5173>

**Login Credentials:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`

## 🐳 Docker Deployment

For containerized deployment using Docker, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

Quick start with Docker Compose (runs both backend and frontend):

```bash
# Build and run both services
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop all services
docker-compose down
```

Access the application:

- **Frontend**: <http://localhost>
- **Backend API**: <http://localhost:8000/docs>

For detailed Docker instructions and deployment options, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

---

## � API Endpoints

### Authentication

**POST** `/api/login`

Request (form data):
```
username: admin
password: admin123
```

Response:
```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGc...",
  "token_type": "bearer"
}
```

### Protected Endpoints

All `/api/predictions` endpoints require JWT authentication.
Include in headers: `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

### Create Health Risk Prediction

**POST** `/api/predictions`

Request body:

```json
{
  "age": 45,
  "weight_kg": 80.0,
  "height_cm": 170.0,
  "smoker": false,
  "alcohol_units_per_week": 5,
  "exercise_hours_per_week": 3.0
}
```

Response:

```json
{
  "id": 1,
  "risk_score": 0.3542,
  "bmi": 27.68,
  "created_at": "2025-11-12T10:30:00"
}
```

### Get Prediction History

**GET** `/api/predictions?limit=50`

Response:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 1,
    "user_id": 1,
    "age": 45,
    "bmi": 27.68,
    "risk_score": 0.3542,
    "created_at": "2025-11-12T10:30:00"
  }
]
```

## 📊 Database Schema

### Users Table

- `id`: Primary key
- `email`: User email
- `hashed_password`: Encrypted password
- `created_at`: Registration timestamp

### Measurements Table

- `id`: Primary key
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `age`: User age
- `weight_kg`: Weight in kilograms
- `height_cm`: Height in centimeters
- `smoker`: Boolean flag
- `alcohol_units_per_week`: Weekly alcohol consumption
- `exercise_hours_per_week`: Weekly exercise duration
- `bmi`: Calculated Body Mass Index
- `risk_score`: ML predicted health risk (0-1)
- `created_at`: Measurement timestamp

## 🧠 Machine Learning Model

The prediction model uses:

- **Algorithm**: Scikit-learn ML model
- **Features**: Age, BMI, smoking status, alcohol consumption, exercise
- **Output**: Risk score (0.0 to 1.0, where higher = higher risk)
- **Training**: Run `backend/app/backend_ml/train.py` to retrain

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
smart-health-backend/
├── backend/
│   ├── Dockerfile                 # Docker configuration
│   └── app/
│       ├── api/
│       │   └── predictions.py     # Prediction endpoints
│       ├── backend_ml/
│       │   ├── train.py          # Model training script
│       │   └── predict.py        # Prediction logic
│       ├── auth.py               # JWT authentication
│       ├── db.py                 # Database session management
│       ├── init_db.py            # Database initialization
│       ├── main.py               # FastAPI application
│       ├── models.py             # SQLModel schemas
│       └── schemas.py            # Pydantic schemas
├── frontend/
│   ├── Dockerfile                # Frontend Docker config
│   ├── nginx.conf               # Nginx configuration
│   ├── public/                  # Static assets
│   └── src/
│       ├── api/
│       │   └── api.ts          # API client
│       ├── components/
│       │   ├── Layout.tsx
│       │   ├── PredictionForm.tsx
│       │   ├── SessionTimer.tsx
│       │   └── TrendCharts.tsx
│       ├── context/
│       │   ├── AuthContext.tsx  # Authentication state
│       │   └── UserContext.tsx  # User onboarding data
│       ├── pages/
│       │   ├── Dashboard.tsx
│       │   ├── History.tsx
│       │   ├── Login.tsx
│       │   └── onboarding/
│       │       ├── Step1Basic.tsx
│       │       ├── Step2Body.tsx
│       │       ├── Step3LifeStyle.tsx
│       │       └── Summary.tsx
│       ├── App.tsx              # Main application
│       ├── main.tsx             # Entry point
│       └── index.css            # Tailwind CSS
├── .dockerignore
├── .gitignore
├── docker-compose.yml            # Docker Compose configuration
├── DOCKER.md                     # Docker deployment guide
├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies
└── README.md
```

## 🔧 Development

### Database Initialization

The database is automatically initialized on application startup. Tables are created if they don't exist.

### Adding New Features

1. Define models in `models.py`
2. Create API routes in `backend/app/api/`
3. Include router in `main.py`

### Running Tests

```bash
# Add your test commands here
pytest
```

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Module Not Found Error

Make sure your virtual environment is activated:
```bash
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1  # PowerShell
```

### Uvicorn Not Found

Run via Python module:
```bash
python -m uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000
```

### Database Issues

Delete the SQLite database file and restart the server to recreate tables.

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

## 👤 Author

**bhakti259**
- GitHub: [@bhakti259](https://github.com/bhakti259)

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions, issues, and feature requests are welcome!

## ⭐ Show Your Support

Give a ⭐️ if this project helped you!

Commit message:

Add SSL certificate acceptance instructions to README
- Add detailed step-by-step guide for accepting self-signed SSL certificate
- Explain why certificate acceptance is required (HTTPS frontend calling HTTPS backend with self-signed cert)
- Note that this is one-time setup per browser/device
- Mention proper SSL certificate solution for production
- Update .env.production with HTTP fallback comment (but keeping HTTPS)

README.md, after:

# 🏥 Smart Health - Healthcare Provider Dashboard

A full-stack health risk assessment platform designed for **healthcare providers** (doctors, clinics, hospitals) to monitor and manage patient health risks using machine learning predictions. The system enables healthcare professionals to conduct patient assessments, track population health trends, and identify high-risk patients requiring immediate attention.

## 🎯 Use Case

**Target Users**: Healthcare providers, medical clinics, hospitals, occupational health departments

**Primary Purpose**: Population health management and patient risk stratification

**Key Scenarios**:
- 👨‍⚕️ **Medical Checkups**: Doctors assess patients during routine visits, instantly view risk scores
- 🏥 **Clinic Management**: Track overall patient population health, identify trends
- 🚨 **Risk Identification**: Automatically flag high-risk patients for follow-up care
- 📊 **Health Analytics**: View risk distribution across patient base, monitor population metrics
- 📋 **Patient Records**: Maintain historical health assessments for each patient

**Workflow**:
1. Healthcare provider logs into the dashboard
2. Conducts patient assessment using 4-step onboarding form (age, body metrics, lifestyle)
3. System calculates health risk score using ML model
4. Dashboard displays patient in risk-categorized table (Low/Medium/High)
5. Provider reviews population analytics and identifies patients needing intervention

## 🌐 Live Demo

**🚀 Full-Stack Application (Production)**

**Frontend (React App)**: [https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net](https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net)

**Backend API (HTTPS)**: [https://13.61.154.156/docs](https://13.61.154.156/docs)

**Demo Credentials:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`

**Deployment:**
- Frontend: AWS S3 + CloudFront CDN (Global distribution)
- Backend: AWS EC2 with Docker + Nginx SSL reverse proxy
- Database: SQLite (containerized)

**⚠️ Important: SSL Certificate Setup (Required for Login)**

The backend uses a **self-signed SSL certificate** for HTTPS. Before you can log in to the application, you must accept this certificate in your browser:

**Steps to Accept Certificate:**
1. Open a new browser tab
2. Navigate to the backend API docs: [https://13.61.154.156/docs](https://13.61.154.156/docs)
3. You'll see a security warning: "Your connection is not private"
4. Click **"Advanced"** button
5. Click **"Proceed to 13.61.154.156 (unsafe)"** or **"Accept the Risk and Continue"**
6. You should now see the FastAPI Swagger documentation
7. Return to the frontend app: [https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net](https://d1shuzzoxjkkc4.cloudfront.net)
8. Login will now work with credentials: `admin` / `admin123`

**Why is this necessary?**
- The frontend (CloudFront) uses HTTPS with a trusted certificate
- The backend (EC2) uses HTTPS with a self-signed certificate (not trusted by browsers)
- Browsers block API calls to untrusted HTTPS endpoints for security
- By visiting the backend URL directly and accepting the certificate, you tell your browser to trust it
- This is a **one-time setup** per browser/device
- In production, you would use a proper SSL certificate from Let's Encrypt or AWS Certificate Manager

## 📊 Healthcare Provider Dashboard

The frontend is designed as a **comprehensive patient management dashboard** for healthcare professionals:

### Dashboard Overview
![Dashboard Screenshot - Coming Soon]

**Key Components**:

1. **Statistics Overview Panel**
   - 5 real-time metrics cards displaying:
     - Total number of patients assessed
     - High-risk patient count (Risk Score ≥ 0.7) - Red alert
     - Medium-risk patient count (0.4 ≤ Risk Score < 0.7) - Yellow warning
     - Low-risk patient count (Risk Score < 0.4) - Green safe
     - Average risk score across entire patient population

2. **Risk Distribution Visualization**
   - Interactive bar chart showing patient distribution across risk categories
   - Helps identify population health trends at a glance
   - Color-coded for quick interpretation (Green/Yellow/Red)

3. **Patient Assessment Table**
   - Comprehensive list of all patient assessments
   - Columns: Patient ID, Age, BMI, Risk Score, Risk Level (badge), Assessment Date
   - Color-coded risk badges for instant visual identification
   - Hover effects for better UX
   - Sortable and searchable (future enhancement)

4. **Patient Assessment Workflow**
   - 4-step form wizard for conducting patient evaluations
   - Auto-calculates BMI from height/weight
   - Maps activity levels to exercise hours (Sedentary=0, Moderate=3, Active=7 hrs/week)
   - Validates all inputs before submission
   - Shows loading states and error messages

### Risk Categorization Logic

| Risk Level | Score Range | Color Code | Action Required |
|------------|-------------|------------|-----------------|
| **Low Risk** | 0.0 - 0.39 | 🟢 Green | Routine monitoring |
| **Medium Risk** | 0.4 - 0.69 | 🟡 Yellow | Follow-up recommended |
| **High Risk** | 0.7 - 1.0 | 🔴 Red | Immediate intervention |

### Typical Use Flow

```
Healthcare Provider Login
    ↓
View Dashboard (Population Overview)
    ↓
Click "New Assessment" / Navigate to Onboarding
    ↓
Enter Patient Data (Steps 1-4)
    ↓
Review Summary & Submit
    ↓
Return to Dashboard (Updated Stats)
    ↓
Review Patient in Table with Risk Badge
    ↓
Identify High-Risk Patients
    ↓
Schedule Follow-up Care
```

## ✨ Features

**Backend:**
- **Health Risk Prediction API**: ML-powered risk assessment based on user health data
- **JWT Authentication**: Secure token-based authentication with auto-logout
- **RESTful API**: Built with FastAPI for high performance and automatic documentation
- **Database Management**: SQLModel + SQLite for data persistence
- **Machine Learning**: Scikit-learn based prediction model
- **Auto-generated API Docs**: Interactive Swagger UI and ReDoc
- **Docker Support**: Containerized deployment with Docker & Docker Compose
- **CORS Enabled**: Configured for cross-origin requests

**Frontend (Healthcare Provider Dashboard):**
- **Provider Authentication**: Secure JWT-based login for healthcare staff
- **Patient Assessment Form**: 4-step onboarding wizard for conducting patient evaluations
  - Step 1: Basic Information (Age, Gender)
  - Step 2: Body Metrics (Height, Weight → auto-calculates BMI)
  - Step 3: Lifestyle & Health (Activity level, Sleep, Smoker, Alcohol consumption)
  - Step 4: Summary Review & Submission
- **Population Health Dashboard**:
  - 📊 **Statistics Cards**: Total patients, High/Medium/Low risk counts, Average risk score
  - 📈 **Risk Distribution Chart**: Bar chart showing patient risk categorization
  - 📋 **Patient Assessment Table**: Sortable list with Patient ID, Age, BMI, Risk Score, Risk Level badges
- **Modern UI**: Tailwind CSS with purple/indigo gradient theme, smooth animations
- **Responsive Design**: Works seamlessly on desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Session Management**: Auto-logout on token expiration for security
- **Real-time Updates**: Dashboard refreshes after each patient assessment
- **Color-Coded Risk Levels**: Green (Low <0.4), Yellow (Medium 0.4-0.7), Red (High ≥0.7)

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

**Backend:**
- **Framework**: FastAPI 0.101.0
- **Authentication**: JWT (python-jose)
- **Password Hashing**: SHA256
- **Server**: Uvicorn 0.23.2
- **ORM**: SQLModel 0.0.14
- **Database**: SQLite (via SQLAlchemy 2.0.44)
- **ML**: Scikit-learn 1.3.2, Pandas 2.2.2, NumPy 1.26.4
- **Python Version**: 3.12.6
- **Container**: Docker & Docker Compose

**Frontend:**
- **Framework**: React 19.2.0 + TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 7.2.2
- **Routing**: React Router v6.30.1
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS v4.1.17
- **Forms**: React Hook Form 7.66.1
- **HTTP Client**: Axios 1.13.2
- **Charts**: Chart.js 4.5.1 + React ChartJS 2
- **State Management**: React Context API

## 📋 Prerequisites

**Option 1: Docker (Recommended - Easiest)**
- Docker Desktop installed
- No Python or Node.js installation needed!

**Option 2: Local Development**
- **Backend**: Python 3.12+, pip, Virtual environment (recommended)
- **Frontend**: Node.js 18+, npm

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Option 1: Using Docker (Recommended - Production Ready) 🐳

The easiest way to run the application is using our pre-built Docker image from Docker Hub:

```bash
# Pull the image from Docker Hub
docker pull bsk25/smart-health-backend:latest

# Run the container (detached mode)
docker run -d -p 8000:8000 --name smart-health-api bsk25/smart-health-backend:latest

# Access the API
# Backend: http://localhost:8000/docs

# Useful commands:
# docker ps                    # View running containers
# docker logs smart-health-api # View container logs
# docker stop smart-health-api # Stop the container
# docker rm smart-health-api   # Remove the container
```

**Or use Docker Compose for full-stack (backend + frontend):**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/bhakti259/smart-health-backend.git
cd smart-health-backend

# Start both backend and frontend
docker-compose up -d

# Access the application
# Frontend: http://localhost
# Backend API: http://localhost:8000/docs
```

For detailed Docker instructions, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

---

### Option 2: Local Development Setup

#### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bhakti259/smart-health-backend.git
cd smart-health-backend
```

#### 2. Set Up Virtual Environment

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv

# Activate virtual environment
# On Windows (PowerShell)
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# On Windows (CMD)
.venv\Scripts\activate.bat

# On Linux/Mac
source .venv/bin/activate
```

### 3. Install Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 4. Train the ML Model (First Time Setup)

```bash
python backend/app/backend_ml/train.py
```

This creates the ML model file (`health_risk_model.pkl`) needed for predictions.

### 5. Run the Server

**Backend:**
```bash
# Using Python module
python -m uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000

# Or if virtual environment is activated
uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000
```

The API will be available at:

- **API**: <http://localhost:8000>
- **Swagger UI**: <http://localhost:8000/docs>
- **ReDoc**: <http://localhost:8000/redoc>

**Frontend:**
```bash
# Navigate to frontend directory
cd frontend

# Install dependencies (first time only)
npm install

# Start development server
npm run dev
```

The frontend will be available at:
- **Application**: <http://localhost:5173>

**Login Credentials:**
- Username: `admin`
- Password: `admin123`

## 🐳 Docker Deployment

For containerized deployment using Docker, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

Quick start with Docker Compose (runs both backend and frontend):

```bash
# Build and run both services
docker-compose up -d

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f

# Stop all services
docker-compose down
```

Access the application:

- **Frontend**: <http://localhost>
- **Backend API**: <http://localhost:8000/docs>

For detailed Docker instructions and deployment options, see [DOCKER.md](./DOCKER.md)

---

## � API Endpoints

### Authentication

**POST** `/api/login`

Request (form data):
```
username: admin
password: admin123
```

Response:
```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGc...",
  "token_type": "bearer"
}
```

### Protected Endpoints

All `/api/predictions` endpoints require JWT authentication.
Include in headers: `Authorization: Bearer <token>`

### Create Health Risk Prediction

**POST** `/api/predictions`

Request body:

```json
{
  "age": 45,
  "weight_kg": 80.0,
  "height_cm": 170.0,
  "smoker": false,
  "alcohol_units_per_week": 5,
  "exercise_hours_per_week": 3.0
}
```

Response:

```json
{
  "id": 1,
  "risk_score": 0.3542,
  "bmi": 27.68,
  "created_at": "2025-11-12T10:30:00"
}
```

### Get Prediction History

**GET** `/api/predictions?limit=50`

Response:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 1,
    "user_id": 1,
    "age": 45,
    "bmi": 27.68,
    "risk_score": 0.3542,
    "created_at": "2025-11-12T10:30:00"
  }
]
```

## 📊 Database Schema

### Users Table

- `id`: Primary key
- `email`: User email
- `hashed_password`: Encrypted password
- `created_at`: Registration timestamp

### Measurements Table

- `id`: Primary key
- `user_id`: Foreign key to Users
- `age`: User age
- `weight_kg`: Weight in kilograms
- `height_cm`: Height in centimeters
- `smoker`: Boolean flag
- `alcohol_units_per_week`: Weekly alcohol consumption
- `exercise_hours_per_week`: Weekly exercise duration
- `bmi`: Calculated Body Mass Index
- `risk_score`: ML predicted health risk (0-1)
- `created_at`: Measurement timestamp

## 🧠 Machine Learning Model

The prediction model uses:

- **Algorithm**: Scikit-learn ML model
- **Features**: Age, BMI, smoking status, alcohol consumption, exercise
- **Output**: Risk score (0.0 to 1.0, where higher = higher risk)
- **Training**: Run `backend/app/backend_ml/train.py` to retrain

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
smart-health-backend/
├── backend/
│   ├── Dockerfile                 # Docker configuration
│   └── app/
│       ├── api/
│       │   └── predictions.py     # Prediction endpoints
│       ├── backend_ml/
│       │   ├── train.py          # Model training script
│       │   └── predict.py        # Prediction logic
│       ├── auth.py               # JWT authentication
│       ├── db.py                 # Database session management
│       ├── init_db.py            # Database initialization
│       ├── main.py               # FastAPI application
│       ├── models.py             # SQLModel schemas
│       └── schemas.py            # Pydantic schemas
├── frontend/
│   ├── Dockerfile                # Frontend Docker config
│   ├── nginx.conf               # Nginx configuration
│   ├── public/                  # Static assets
│   └── src/
│       ├── api/
│       │   └── api.ts          # API client
│       ├── components/
│       │   ├── Layout.tsx
│       │   ├── PredictionForm.tsx
│       │   ├── SessionTimer.tsx
│       │   └── TrendCharts.tsx
│       ├── context/
│       │   ├── AuthContext.tsx  # Authentication state
│       │   └── UserContext.tsx  # User onboarding data
│       ├── pages/
│       │   ├── Dashboard.tsx
│       │   ├── History.tsx
│       │   ├── Login.tsx
│       │   └── onboarding/
│       │       ├── Step1Basic.tsx
│       │       ├── Step2Body.tsx
│       │       ├── Step3LifeStyle.tsx
│       │       └── Summary.tsx
│       ├── App.tsx              # Main application
│       ├── main.tsx             # Entry point
│       └── index.css            # Tailwind CSS
├── .dockerignore
├── .gitignore
├── docker-compose.yml            # Docker Compose configuration
├── DOCKER.md                     # Docker deployment guide
├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies
└── README.md
```

## 🔧 Development

### Database Initialization

The database is automatically initialized on application startup. Tables are created if they don't exist.

### Adding New Features

1. Define models in `models.py`
2. Create API routes in `backend/app/api/`
3. Include router in `main.py`

### Running Tests

```bash
# Add your test commands here
pytest
```

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Module Not Found Error

Make sure your virtual environment is activated:
```bash
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1  # PowerShell
```

### Uvicorn Not Found

Run via Python module:
```bash
python -m uvicorn backend.app.main:app --reload --port 8000
```

### Database Issues

Delete the SQLite database file and restart the server to recreate tables.

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

## 👤 Author

**bhakti259**
- GitHub: [@bhakti259](https://github.com/bhakti259)

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions, issues, and feature requests are welcome!

## ⭐ Show Your Support

Give a ⭐️ if this project helped you!
